should accept yourself just the way you
are what does that say about who I
should become is that just now off the
table because I'm already good enough in
every way so am I done or something get
the hell up get your act together adopt
some responsibility put your life
together develop a vision unfold all
those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world
and that'll be the adventure of your
life
[Music]
I gave up philosophy because I didn't
feel I could add anything to man's
intellectual history so that I remember
being stuck in the library of Cambridge
it was raining so I went down to the
basement and read the abstracts of all
the phds done in the past 100 years you
know the abstract's the first five pages
and I remember thinking
what I was doing wasn't I I didn't
really have any ideas that merited
spending three to five years of my life
so because I was so good at philosophy
and I had I thought I'd be good at um
law too I didn't have enough money to to
become a lawyer I'd seen a trial when I
was 13 or 14 at the Old Bailey which
really impressed me with some barristers
and cross-examination that was a
shocking thing for me to see because
I've seen a witness give evidence and by
the time it finished giving evidence
it's called in Chief I totally believe
the witness and then the Barrister
questioned him I remember seeing this
and I totally disbelieved him after the
questioning so that sort of ran parallel
to this because he's the endowed issue
exactly right so you heard a story that
was perfectly compelling and then you
saw someone tear it into bits exactly
and they were shocking for me because I
totally believed them the the witness
the first time
thank you
hi everyone I'm here in London today and
I have the opportunity to speak to Joe
Hague and I met you with the film
producer the British film producer guy
Richie
um we've met this is the fourth time
we've met and uh the last three times we
had a very interesting conversation Joe
has had a remarkable life on a variety
of different in a variety of different
directions and on a variety of different
planes and so for me this is an
opportunity to get to know him further
um he's had a remarkable career as a
litigator and is also deeply involved in
the world of modern Fine Art and so we
share a lot of interests I worked with
lawyers for a long time in Toronto when
I was working as a clinician and a
consultant and I've been collecting art
for a long time and and Joe's quite the
fascinating character and so I thought
I'd have this opportunity today to get
to know him a little bit more but also
to introduce all of you to him and so
that's the plan for today so Joe I think
we should probably start by uh
doing a little bit of an investigation
into your background and so where were
you born I was born in Lebanon
um and I came to England when I was four
years old I'm an only child my mom and
dad were immigrant workers
and they came to England I often get
answers they came to England simply to
make a living and seek their fortune or
just to get a life because it was tough
in Lebanon then
and when was that
um
we arrived on January the 9th 1967. 67.
it's funny immigrants often remember the
the day they arrived anywhere it's like
an important date yeah 67. yeah yeah
well it's quite something to arrive in a
new country with her young child and try
to orient herself and get going what did
your parents do in Lebanon
um my mum didn't do anything really and
my father was a carpenter and a French
polisher just um polishing wood really
often in churches um church pews needed
polishing French polishing and how did
they get the opportunity to come to to
Great Britain
it's funny like most things in life it's
pure accidents and chance but
um
the UK occupied England I think of the
second half of the first world at the
second world war and so my auntie and my
mum's auntie I call them my auntie
married uh an English Soldier she'd
fallen in love with she came here so we
had the contact here most Lebanese would
normally go to Australia or as you
probably know to Canada especially
Montreal
but we came here just because of that
chance encounter that my my great aunt
had with an English Soldier about 1944
so she was living here and so she helped
us come here and so you came here when
you were four do you remember anything
of Lebanon as a child
yeah we've talked about this I think a
little bit before not I do remember some
things but I'm not sure how much I
remember because it's been put in my
mind by constant repetition by you know
by my mother and father
um I have a vague memory of things I
remember wanting to get these they sold
fantastic little biscuits and cakes and
syrupy drinks and they'd come around the
streets shouting where anyone wanted
them and if you wanted them you'd lower
a basket down and with some money and
then they'd take the basket up at Parrot
hours very keen on getting those little
goodies as a kid you know that that that
overlaying of memory that's an
interesting phenomenon because we tend
to think of memory as something like a
videotape recording and it's not that at
all that memory is very malleable and
every time you bring a memory to mind
and discuss it and contemplated you
actually change the shape of the memory
partly because you're contextualizing it
differently as you think about it and so
it alters and transforms well you play
with it and it's that's sort of how the
story of your life emerges from the
memories of your life and there's a back
and forth between that constantly and so
so and what what were things like for
you in in Great Britain where did you
move specifically just to London to
Southwest London uh Wimbledon where I
was brought up
um you know my Auntie and Uncle helped
out my great aunts and uncle helped out
and my mum and dad got jobs they worked
very hard typical immigrant worker jobs
you know helping in their kitchen and
helping on a building side but things
were very good I mean looking back
um we were very poor but at the time we
didn't really feel poor you know yeah
well if you have hope you're not poor
exactly you know I lived in Montreal
as a graduate student and I lived in a
poor neighborhood
and I didn't have much money because I
was on a fellowship and I um at that
that particular time I was supporting
Tammy at least to some degree and but
I knew I had a reasonably
a future that was likely to progress
upward and I started to really
understand the difference between not
having money and being poor at that
point because all my neighbors were poor
the neighborhood I lived in was sort of
it wasn't a slum by any stretch of the
imagination but it was a neighborhood
that had been multi-generationally poor
and it was poor enough so there were
some people who'd Fallen completely out
of the system in the neighborhood and
they were by all measures poor fractured
fragmented broken and I thought well
what's the difference here exactly
I don't have any money and they don't
have any money but I'm definitely not
poor and they're definitely poor and I
realized that
the almost the entire difference was
well I had nothing but opportunity in
front of me and if you have nothing but
opportunity in front of you assuming
you're not starving you're not poor and
partly because we live to a far greater
degree than we realize on Faith and Hope
and if there's a pathway open in front
of you so even with your parents you
know if they believed that you were
likely to have a life that was going to
improve quite dramatically as it
progressed then they have a reason for
all their sacrifices and their work and
then with that reason you're not exactly
poor you just don't have any money
that's not the same thing I agree you
have hope and something I was in an
ambulance a while ago with someone who
is critically ill and um
I remember the ambulance driver I was
saying you think they'll make it and
they say yeah sure they will I'm sure
they will you have to have hope and they
said this nice phrase they said hope is
the last thing to die that's really
in a way the way it should be if it dies
before it should then you die shortly
thereafter but yes you have to have hope
yeah well you see with clinical
depression it has two components and one
is that people suffer from
both an overwhelming influx of pain and
anxiety so that's on the negative
emotion front and you might think that
that's sufficient to produce depression
but it's not real depression is also
characterized by the eradication of
positive emotion and hope is Hope is
really if you had to
specify a single word to represent the
bulk of the positive emotion that people
most truly want to experience hope is
likely the best word because hope is
experienced in relationship to uh to a
goal to a valued goal and so if you see
yourself progressing towards a valued
goal or you see any pathway whatsoever
open up towards a valued goal then you
have hope and if you're truly depressed
that hope vanishes and all you see in
front of you are obstacles and pitfalls
and well and then if you add pain and
anxiety to that you've got a good recipe
for despair and that despair that's
poverty and like and this is an
important thing to understand because
this is I think one of the problems of
the both the right and the left wing
ideas in relationship to money the left
thinks that poverty is caused by lack of
money and you can't cure
despair with money
you can
add impulsive Hedonism to despair with
money but you can't cure it with money
and the right well
I will leave that out of the
conversation for now and so what was
your childhood like in Wimbledon yeah
it's very
it was very good very happy my mom and
dad
were probably more dependent on me than
usual parents because they couldn't
speak English as quickly as I could or
as well as I could right so I had to
help them read letters and help them do
things but it was a very you know they
loved me so much and um that was the
main thing they did for me but it was
good a good upbringing obviously
everything was State paid the school you
know because we didn't have money to go
to a
fee paying school but I had a very happy
upbringing if it appears to be the case
now when I pull my memory out of it I
didn't put it back I was I had lots of
good friends there's one thing as we
were talking earlier about where you
lived in Montreal which I thought was
quite interesting is that because we
were so relatively poor we had a house
with three bedrooms in it but because we
didn't have so much money to pay for it
we rented out a lot of the rooms this is
like 50 50 years ago
and so you'd always have different I
think people who live I wouldn't say in
poverty but people who don't have much
money they often live closer together
and on top of each other and so we had
lots of people coming in and out of the
house I remember there was an arranging
couple an Irish Builder an old lady who
lived in the house and you saw quite a
lot of Life jammed up first and that's
quite good as a kid for me to see so
many different
so many different people from different
societies really right looking I didn't
realize at the time but it was really
really good well there must have been
some Advantage too to being dependent
dependent upon like that by your parents
at such an early age because that puts
you
that I mean children really like to have
genuine responsibility if you can lay
out a pathway forward for them so that
they are contributing in some way that
isn't merely illusory you know it helps
them pay for the burden of their care
and it's not like they're thinking that
through but but they're feeling it you
know kids kids because they're human
would just as soon be in a reciprocal
relationship if they can manage it one
of the advantages to being in the
situation that you're in is that you
actually did have some real things to do
it mattered that you could speak English
and read and intermediate for your
parents and certainly that uh places a
quasi-adult burden on you and you could
imagine that that could get overwhelming
if your parents were struggling and
barely staying afloat but you could also
see that that could be an optimal
situation for someone young how about
how are you treated by the other kids in
the neighborhood you're an immigrant kid
I mean you know the the Trope would be
that that would go badly and of course
obviously often it doesn't title think
it probably goes badly more often than
the kid's life in general goes badly
yeah so but how are you treated very
well I mean in in where I was brought up
in London there are lots of immigrants
really for different phases there's
different phases of immigration
um I find I've always found England or
London anyway the least sort of race
racist place going but there were lots
of Irish kids Indian kids you know
Caribbean kids so it was pretty mixed up
and there wasn't any any racism so
everyone was kind of welcomed in the
Immigrant community and some and the and
the English people also very welcoming
so I've never had any sort of I've
always felt welcome here and if which
I'm really appreciative and so as my so
my mother and father right right and and
you also
your your your
you appear quite
positively predisposed to the memories
you have of your childhood and you said
that your parents loved you um and how
did that how did that make itself
manifest like what was your relationship
with your father like
he
I had a bit of fear about him because he
was quite a strong and potentially
violent man but he never hit me but
funny he when I was a child my mother
used to hit me but not in a in a way
that really hurt he was just more in a
way that people did 40 or 50 years ago
not in a in a bad way but it made no
difference to me I'd just be running
around the room would be shouting each
other we used to feel sorry for our
mother when she got pushed to the point
where she'd have to hit us like the
three or two siblings and you know we'd
ramp up the excitement in the house or
the squabbling or whatever it was and
Mum was very patient but now and then
we'd push her Beyond her capacity for
tolerance and she'd you know lash out in
some manner that didn't really make any
difference at all we were way more
likely to stop misbehaving because we
felt guilty that we'd upset her that
because of anything that was a
consequence of the of the blow
I think the way that my mom and daddy
were very simple because they're
essentially from a village in the
mountains in Lebanon
and they had a very pure and simple
approach to life and the thing I think
the thing that they
gave me when you said how did love
manifest itself it also manifests itself
in a belief in me and I remember I was
telling I was talking to some friends
recently if I said I wanted to do
anything they would support me anything
at all really yeah and they would
believe in me like even if I would say
to my mom now
I've decided to try and win 100 meters
Olympic gold medal for sprinting
she wouldn't say don't be so ridiculous
of course you can do it you know and
even though it'd be absurd she really
would believe in me even now she'd
believe me doing it and that gave me so
much that's very interesting because you
know one of the things I think that my
parents gave me on both sides was
exactly that and that that's an
interesting example of the positive
manifestation of faith and it wasn't
like they were deluded about my stature
or potential ability that that and it
wasn't a narcissistic grandiosity on
their part about the specialness of
their child it was I I thought this
through I think Technically when I was
working as a clinician and it was I
really think that what it was was the
best in them serving the best in me and
their fundamental willingness to have
that happen and I really noticed the
difference between the relationship I
had particularly with my father and the
relationship who was who was a rough sky
and and and uh who had very high
standards and who was a strict person he
was no pushover and no you know
sympathetic font of easy love but he had
this intrinsic faith in my ability and I
always had that in with me always and my
friends I grew up in a working-class
town and my friends by and large didn't
have that particularly from their father
and that was definitely something that
was hard on them and lacking in their
life because they didn't have that it's
like an internal sense of
well if your parents have faith in you
it's a lot easier for you to have faith
in you as you move out to confront the
world it's it's
uh it's a gift of faith that's
transmitted down the generations
fundamentally and so your parents did
provide you with that did they do it in
different ways like how would you
separate their rules oh in very similar
ways they would be both supportive
whatever I wanted let me do and they'd
say well let me they would support me
and believe in me you know if I'd say
I'm gonna do this they'd say
of course you know take the take winning
the 100 meters they say somebody's got
to do it why not you you're as good as
anyone else
yeah why not you which is kind of a good
a good question so they just believe
that if you worked hard you could do
anything you wanted to sure it's a good
question in general for people to
consider it's like well if this could be
done
in some conceivable World it could be
you and I mean obviously every person
can't do everything but there's a lot of
things to do so you can probably find
some of the things that are your things
to do and so
so now how about school how do you do in
school I did I was very gifted academic
I wouldn't say very gifted but fairly
gifted and um I went to Catholic School
my mum and dad the Christians and they
were Maronite Christians but
um
the closest they could get to that was
Catholic school so I went to a Catholic
school there was a state school that was
sponsored by the state so we didn't have
to pay money and it was run by some
Jesuits in Wimbledon and so it was quite
a Catholic school we had to go to we had
to pray the beginning in every
lesson and we used to go to mass every
once a week in the morning I used after
I normally went more than once a week
actually I normally went every day it
was a quick mass and it was just a good
way to clean your to clear your mind it
wasn't that I was particularly religious
as a child but you get into the to the
ritual and the routine of it and the
meditative nature of it which I found
very useful I found that quite useful at
University too and how old were you when
you started doing that between 13 and 18
really and so and and you found that
that ritual useful very useful very
early right well probably 14 or 15 at
least then and what how do you think it
helped you Orient yourself at that age
on a day-to-day basis what were you
orienting yourself toward I think if you
coupled it with another thing that I
really took away from school you know
through school you cram your mind
through loads of facts that you have to
um let go as soon as you get an examiner
after a member again so there's loads of
bad games but the one sort of thing that
stays in my mind now after many years of
thinking about school was that
on the Jesuits in my school had this
thing that for every
piece of work you did every essay or
problem you had to solve you'd have to
write at the top of it something called
amdg which is Latin for add more in the
glorium which is which means for the
greater glory of God now that sounds in
a way a bit over the top because you
think you know just writing a little
essay or solving a problem why should
this be for the greater glory of God but
that stayed in me that the idea that
everything you did whether you're
religious or not if you believe in
something more than simply yourself
um you know I have my religious moments
too it's not like I'm a very devout
person but I'd say with me the belief
that everything you do has to be for
something great it has to be for
something
and so if it's for something then you
could infer that it should be for
something good and if it's for something
good it might as well be for the best
and so I mean we we talked a little bit
earlier in today's discussion about hope
and you know people often find
themselves mired into kind of
unproductive hopelessness and that's
partly because they don't direct what
they're doing to trivial things they're
doing towards a higher purpose and if
you understand that each step you take
no matter how small it is is a step
taken towards some somewhere that you
really want to go and should go then
that does Infuse each step with meaning
and that's how the nervous system is set
up because hope is experienced in
relationship to a goal and your goals
can be fragmented and fractionated and
impulsive but that just means you're not
very well organized if you compile all
those fragmented infractionated goals
into something like the uppermost goal
which in principle would unite you with
other people because unless you want an
uppermost goal that divides you from
other people then you then everything
you do should carry that in premature
you know in the in The Sermon on the
Mount
the fundamental injunction of the
servant Sermon on the Mount is to orient
your attitude in the most profound way
towards that which is the highest right
and to decide that you're going to serve
the highest and then to concentrate on
the moment and it looks like that idea
was embedded in that Jesuit practice
right he said it's over the top it's
like well
not when you compare the Alternatives
right because the alternatives are a
kind of pointless fractionation or or
what your aiming down right yeah at
least it makes you try your best because
you know because you're thinking is this
the best I can do
for myself and for
for the world or for a greater a greater
force it just it does give you that
motivation and realization everything
you do you have to try your best and
when you were a teenager and so this is
13 to 15 say that's a time when people
often start to become
somewhat cynical most kids misbehave a
little bit more especially boys around
that time than they might before that or
after that I mean were you uh positively
oriented person when you were a teenager
in the same way that you appear to have
been as a child did that carry through
like the the teenage years yes it did
yeah I was positive orientated
throughout that time I think I lost it
for a bit when I was 17 for a few months
when I met my first girlfriend but then
that was a a you know I lost my I didn't
study so hard for a few months but then
I got back into it right so that was a
romantic disappointment right but that
was the only sort of crisis of of let's
say faith and optimism that you
experienced when you were that age I
wouldn't call it the crisis more of a
diversion yeah yeah but that's fine
as well the religious training per se
that you obtained at the hands of the
Jesuits and you said that you found the
meditative aspect of mass useful to
orient yourself very rapidly and and
fell into that as a practice so that
gave you a chance to think like what
were you doing when you were what do you
think you were doing when you were
attending mass and and then also being
willing to attend it
I wasn't listening to much of what was
going on in the mass I was just thinking
about what I was doing why I was doing
it what I was going to do that day going
back to this is clearing your mind
really it wasn't particularly it wasn't
like I was listening to this some of the
times I didn't so I normally listened to
the sermon but it's just
it was almost like meditation I think
there was another time in my life when I
also went to mass every day
it wasn't even math it's called the even
song when I was at University and about
5 15 there was a 20-minute um very
spiritually uplifting
um choir even song and it was fantastic
you're in this amazing building right
there was this beautiful Chapel
University chapels and I was a King's
College Cambridge and you go in there
and you just feel it's not as if you're
thinking about anything you just
uplifted and transcended into something
else and that and you come out of that
feeling cleansed and feeling like this
well that Clarity of mind so imagine
there's multiple states that you can
exist in conceptually and one state
would be the state where the goal that
you're pursuing is
Paramount and obvious
and what that means is the world divides
itself quite clearly into a set of
ordinances that will move you forward
Pathways and tools and a set of
obstacles but it's clear imagine instead
that you're plagued by a multitude of
concerns and what that means it's as if
you're trying to operate with 10
different Maps simultaneously and that
is murky and so when people use
metaphors like clear their mind what
they are referring to is the fact that
if you can get what you're doing clear
then the world that lays itself out in
front of you
is clear practically you can navigate in
it but it's also clear emotionally
because what's relevant is obvious and
what's irrelevant which is even more
important is obvious and what's good is
obvious and what's not good is obvious
and that does mean that your mind is
clear and the alternative to that is a
confused and hopeless anxiousness
it is I think I think there's another
some of my best ideas happen when I it's
not so much you clear your mind but if
you stop doing what you're doing
even if you're doing nothing else and if
or if you go away sometimes like you
might go away to
um have a break for a week or two and
then you look back at your life in
London how busy you are and you see
things a bit differently when you when
you stop doing them and stand away from
them sometimes you have the best ideas
about how you can carry on
in a world that is constantly changing
and moving is such a fast rate there's
no better time to become more deeply
rooted in your faith a great place to
start is building a habit of prayer and
meditation join me and thousands of
others on hallow the number one
Christian Prayer app in the U.S hallow
is helping me maintain a daily prayer
routine and it can help you too download
the app for free at hallow.com Jordan
you set prayer reminders and track your
progress along the way not sure where to
start check out father Mike schmitz's
Bible in a year available on the Hello
app for brief daily Bible readings and
Reflections or pray alongside Mark
Wahlberg Jim Caviezel and even some
world-class athletes with Halo you can
customize a personal prayer plan that
works for you listen anywhere you are
with downloadable offline sessions get
an exclusive three-month free trial at
hallow.com Jordan that's hallow.com
Jordan
when you're task focused
your perception is very high resolution
and everything gives
zeroed out right except this very
specific thing that you're nearly
focusing on and that's great because
it's efficient and you can concentrate
on the task at hand but it's not so good
if what you're focusing on happens to
not be exactly the right thing and so if
you can step back in this more
contemplative mood it enables you to
evaluate and reshift what your
priorities might be and that's a that's
very different than
concentrating on the micro routines that
are relevant to a given priority and and
it seems
it's a bit of an oversimplification but
not too much to say that if you're
locked on Target in relationship to a
goal and then undertaking the micro
routines necessary to make it happen
you're dominated by your left hemisphere
and it's mostly linguistic and practical
and when you snap into that more
contemplative phase then you're shifting
your goals and maybe voluntary
voluntarily daydreaming is like that and
that's a right hemisphere state of
existence and to calibrate yourself
properly you have to continually shift
between focus and
and contemplation of what should be
focused on and that's a
that's a dance that's a good way of
thinking about it that's the Eternal
communication between yin and yang
that's way finding
um that's what happens in a good
conversation because there's that
Dynamic interplay and that to get that
optimized that's optimized psychological
function isn't much different than
optimizing those two processes so that
they benefit each other so and again in
school at this age so you're in junior
high now 13 to 15 let's say what's your
social network like at that point
pretty good it was a boys school so we
played lots of rugby and I hang out with
boys occasionally we went to a
um some sort of Community Club but it
was basically hanging out with boys
playing sport which I really enjoyed oh
so and were you athletic yeah very and
what did you specialize at rugby really
oh yeah yeah yeah so so that's another
reason
in all likelihood that you were
reasonably popular right so you were
successful on the Athletics and what
were you like why were you successful
I think it's probably a game going back
to my mum and dad because I believe that
I could run faster and further and
harder even if I couldn't I just had a
lot of belief in myself and so you had a
con you had an intrinsic confidence
exactly which enabled you to try and do
things that you might not otherwise do
if you had some self-doubt right so you
don't failed it you were you weren't
held back by any unnecessary intrinsic
limitations yeah well you see this often
with people that a lot of the times the
walls that hold people in are
unrecognized
implicit limitations on
self-conceptualization the notion that
well I could do this just never occurs
to the person they've already got
themselves boxed in this is the sort of
person I am and anything beyond that
that's Often parameterized by their
parents achievements for example
especially if their parents aren't very
supportive they presume that this is who
they are and that's all they could ever
be and that's that and people will say
to themselves you see this a lot in
negative self-talk that's associated
with depression it's like oh I could
never say something uh in a group
well man you formulate that idea at 12.
and you never alter it your whole life
you never say anything in a group your
whole life and if you take someone like
that in a psychotherapeutic situation
and you point out to them look you just
said
you could never say something in a group
someone socially anxious might be like
that it's like
let's take that apart a bit
I mean could you not say one word what
if the group was two people you
obviously talk in two beep to two people
have you ever talked to three people you
can decompose it you find that people
hem themselves in with these
tyrannical self
conceptions that limit them to an
indeterminate degree it's like now
everybody's not going to be an artistic
genius but most people can learn to draw
and they can learn to draw a lot faster
than they think and they can learn to
draw faster
and become better than they think quite
rapidly they won't even try and so this
gift that you were given by your parents
was something like
or something like
the generalized rejection of that whole
set of
a priori negative conception so your
default
operating presupposition was you could
probably do it yeah that's a great thing
to be able to give your kids that that
belief that because I used to try this
with my son it's like you know I'd ask
him you think you could do this do you
think you could do this and his default
answer always was yes
you know when you can think about that
as a kind of delusion an optimistic
delusion but
but you have to be pretty damn cynical
to reduce it to that yeah exactly and
maybe it's an optimistic optimistic
delusion but maybe your son's right to
have it because he can't do it well it's
better than the pessimistic delusion
which is no no of course I could because
I've certainly met people like that
whose default 100 was no
any question that they even said to
themselves is oh no I probably couldn't
do that
yeah I agree with you and my parents
were very poor and because they were
immigrants and they changed their whole
life now which I find incomprehensible
how somebody would have the courage to
do that at their age of 25 or 35 my
father was 9 or 10 years older and they
were also disinhibited as well and I
learned a lot from them because they
challenged everything because they came
from another Society my father this is a
rather
small story but it shows how
disinhibited they were if my father lost
my mother in a supermarket he'd stand in
the middle of a supermarket and Shout
out in his full voice my mum's name
Salma Salma and everyone would look
around at him and he wouldn't care he
just said look I don't know what the
problem is I've lost my wife I want to
find her who has the
in England and most of them were small
people a bit more inhibited they
wouldn't shout the head off at the
moment
but that different approach to life
where that everything was
you know could be challenged and they
would do they would do things like that
as if they're in the village it was a
kind of a double a double life so you
saw two two parts of that you saw the
fact that well your parents had broken
all the shackles in their life that were
implicit and explicit merely by moving
to a completely new culture and then
they also brought with them a set of
behaviors that didn't match the precise
limitations of the culture they were in
that's right and that's very significant
for me as well because I'll come back to
me but I was brought up
in a little Lebanese bubble with my mum
and dad and I speak Arabic to them
and I was also brought up as an English
boy in a school and that double life
meant I didn't really feel
um totally English or totally liberated
so I was kind of outside of both
um little Societies in a way especially
because of my parents right so that
makes you a shapeshifter yeah what does
that mean well there are figures in
mythology who exist on boundaries so the
spirit Mercury for example Mercury is
the winged messenger of the Gods and he
exists half in the human world and half
in the Divine world but there's a place
there that's a border between two
categories and the way Mercury makes
himself manifest is by catching your
interest right some things catch your
interest
some things don't there's a pattern to
the things that catch your interest and
that pattern is associated with well you
could say you become interested in the
things that are likely to further your
development so you could think that
implicit inside you is the realm of
the potential better you and then it
captures your interest and it guides you
in those directions and that's the
spirit that exists on the boundary and
the spirit that exists on a boundary
there's a word for that the word is
psychopomp and a psychopomp isn't one
thing or another it's a shape shifter a
trickster and what what what that means
is that one of the things you learned is
that you could operate in two different
territories and so whatever you what
were fundamentally wasn't limited by
either of those territories right
exactly so and that is I think how
you've described me is how I am and I I
do I have this tension with some people
I look after and manage in in the
business world
I I love chaos and I love
I I I enjoy that and I enjoy
when there's a real crisis is when I'm
at my best and when we don't know what's
going to happen next I you know I love
chaos I remember my
my partner I was going to
I was getting a flight and I was on the
way to the airport
I said where are you going and I said
I'm not sure I'm either going to
Singapore or New York I've got tickets
to both he said well you're in the car
on the way to the airport I said I know
they both go at the same time so when
are you going to decide so I'll decide
when I get there
um most people don't like that degree of
indecision and really else in life but I
had a rucksack and I could go to either
but that's where I thrive well that okay
so that's interesting too that you are
able to
seems to me that the fact that you're
able to do that
is associated with this default
presupposition that your parents helped
uh instill and and and support in you
which is that
while you can do it you know because one
way of limiting anxiety anxiety is to
limit
choice
zero Choice generally speaking zero
anxiety because there's no conflict but
another way of dealing with anxiety is
to presume that if the situation shifts
on you
you can manage it that's why people like
to watch jugglers for example or
acrobats because you know they're in a
situation that's dynamically unstable
and yet they can continue their complex
operations and everyone loves that and
it's because it's a reflection of that
Spirit that's able to juggle and so now
how did it come about that you had
tickets to Singapore and New York some
other places I had meetings in both
places but I wasn't sure what was going
to be the most important tool I made a
final phone call I had to just assess
which was the best place to be at that
particular time right so you were
leaving it till to the last minute which
were you where you'd have the most
information yeah
I'll come back to that
I can deal with that now actually
in a way of bad decision making it's not
quite in the relevant place in my career
but often people spend a lot of time
focusing on what's the right decision to
make yeah but they neglect
it's a very important question and this
is in my life as a litigator really
or even in life generally they neglect
the important question of when is the
right time to make the decision
and so they just think
should I do this or that but they don't
think when do I have to decide because
or when should I do it and that's often
neglected in a simplistic approach to
decision making in my experience
sixty percent of U.S pork production
comes from one company their Hogs are
given something called ractopamine which
is banned in 160 countries yet you find
it in your grocery aisle every day if
you like knowing exactly where your meat
comes from check out moink today with
moik that place is from small Family
Farms all across the country
white delivers grass-fed and
grass-finished beef and lamb pastured
pork and chicken in sustainable wild
caught Alaskan salmon straight to your
door wink offers rib eyes chicken
breasts pork chops salmon fillets and
much more
so keep American farming Going Strong by
signing up at moipbox.com jvp right now
in Dr Peterson's listeners can get free
bacon in your first box it's the best
bacon you'll ever taste that's
moinkbox.com
jbp moinkbox.com jbp
well people also assume you know I I
watched my colleagues for example in
graduate school try to figure out which
city they should live in if they had
competing job offers from different
universities you know they might be on
completely on different sides of the
continent or in different countries and
so you might say well this is a really
crucial decision
and the truth of the matter is it's
actually not that crucial a decision
because
if you're in
a good University
in a large city
you have way more opportunity than
you'll ever be able to make use of in
both places so the first thing you have
to realize is both of those decisions in
principle could be good and
the right City isn't even an appropriate
category because it's not like a city is
one thing a city is 50 billion things
and so the real question in a situation
like that is
could I land in my feet and start to
operate properly regardless of which of
these places that I'm in and the answer
to that should be yes and if it's yes
then you think oh well either choice is
good and then you can start thinking
well now I can maybe I'll go to City one
and talk to the people there and see how
I get along and I'll go to City too and
you know start to find my way but people
often are under the misapprehension that
they come to these important inflection
points in their life like which city and
that's going to determine the entire
course of their life and it does insofar
as geographical Locale is one thing
rather than another but if it's a choice
between
immensely productive options then
there's no sacrifice in the choice
there's just a choice between different
Banquets exactly but even if there is a
sacrifice you'd have to ask yourself
when do I have to make this decision is
it now because people feel the pressure
of hearing things you know they say well
I don't have to decide until the 31st of
March between now and then yeah I'll
just think about it yeah and then I'll
decide that's one that's what I'm saying
but people very often Force themselves
to make decision before they have to
people who work with me or for me get
frustrated because they say are we doing
this or that and I say when do I have to
decide and often because I leave things
up in the air like the juggler yeah yeah
yeah yeah
um it gets very frustrating as people
like to have an ordered they'd like to
know what they're going to do but I'd
like to leave things you don't mind the
uncertainty well you know I used to tell
they had many undergraduates who for
example
they didn't know whether they wanted to
go to medicine or to Clinical Psychology
and so I'd say well
apply to both
make 20 applications to both and maybe
you don't even have a choice because you
get accepted to psychology and not
medicine
end of problem or if the problem will
become more acute when you actually
realize that you didn't get into
medicine and that's what you wanted but
that'll snap into Focus but you can
pursue it but then let's say well now
you have three offers from a clinical
program and three offers from the
medical program it's like okay now you
have six decisions to make and now you
can go to each of these places and
investigate them and you're going to
gather way more information and then by
the time you need to make the decision
which could be as late as possible
you're going to be much more informed
and so that's another problem with
making a premature decision is that my
advice to my students and my clients was
always uh don't close the door before
it's necessary to close the door because
you're you're not maximally informed at
that point and and also
you don't have to accept that temptation
to premature prematurely foreclose right
to deal with that anxiety it's not a
good way of dealing with it it is the
options on the table it is a Temptation
for people to make decisions before they
need to because they want to have order
but they they close doors yeah they
don't need to and that's hard psychology
I don't know why it's hard well it's a
lack it is it I do believe it's
associated with the lack of faith of the
sort that we've been describing is that
people aren't
they don't have enough faith in their
own ability to dance and to juggle and
so they want to specify the narrower
pathway as soon as possible to get
things you know unnecessary chaos isn't
helpful that and and uh
and and I don't think you want to you
know distribute Mayhem and catastrophe
wherever you go but and the thing is
sometimes I might leave it to the last
minute and it's not the last minute I've
met you pushed it too far and you should
have made it yeah well that's another
that's another mistake you can make but
the thing is there are mistakes
everywhere okay so now you're you're in
in this in the Jesuit schools
and are your academic interests starting
to
make themselves known and what are they
the two things I was very interested in
science I missed one thing out that was
important in my formative years which
I've just realized and talking to you
now is when I was about 13 I went to
visit my family in Montreal and my uncle
Joseph is uh is a teacher there
professor of philosophy and
philosophy means lots of things to
different people obviously he did what's
called in England European philosophy
because the English philosophy or
anglo-american philosophy tends to be
quite dry and logical and to do with you
know Wittgenstein and Bertram Russell
which I also like so he did Safra and
other people and at the age of 13 he
spoke to me a lot and really influenced
me and um persuaded me to read Descartes
meditations and discourse
um which is a really important thing for
me as you you probably know they're
about um skepticism and what you can
know for certain and he challenges all
the assumptions you have and that really
started a thousand important things for
me why
because
I was a bit shocked that you could
challenge so many things and I started
challenging things
in my school in the subjects that I was
taught and it changed my
my attitude to life really questioned a
lot it made me question a lot of things
and not take anything for granted and at
the same time so it helped you notice
you were taking things for granted yeah
and then it helped you
realize that wasn't necessary and
develop your skill at questioning so why
didn't that just throw you into disarray
because it sort of through Descartes
into District right I mean he became
rather desperate before
he came to his final doubt yeah
looking back at maybe did throw me into
this way I spent
many hours discussing these things with
my my closest friend at the time a guy
called Justin including the debates one
has when one's young about the meaning
of life particularly we were obsessed
with them determinism whether you had
any free will at all and so we just
discussed these things at the same time
I developed a strong interest in in
science
so I did you know lots of mathematics
and physics and chemistry
um but like most young people you begin
to change after a while you're
desperately trying to find meaning for
life and and question things and but
that stayed with me a bit longer because
after how that influenced me that's when
it happened at 13 but by the time I went
to University I decided
to do philosophy at University which is
where did you go to university I went to
York and Cambridge I did postgraduate
work that's meant to be doing a PhD at
Cambridge and it was on the philosophy
of science fun apps it all came together
and so Yorkie philosophy yep under
Cambridge too and at Cambridge after
that yeah exactly and so what did the
study of philosophy at York entail I
don't I don't know the class structure
no you just have I think you do nine
different subjects like I said sort of
anglo-american philosophies tends to be
logic and Wittgenstein and Bertram
Russell and a lot of and what they call
this you know epistemology which is you
know the study of knowledge how it is
that you how is it that you know
something exactly how is it you know
something do you really know it and how
do you know you know it and
um and that these were fascinating
subjects for me and for me in particular
with my interest in science and
Discovery and progress and as that
famous book which you'll be aware of the
structure of scientific revolutions how
you change your paradigms about what you
know and and what I was doing my PhD on
although after about a year or so I
decided not to
to leave for I didn't I didn't want to
carry on with it like I'll come back to
that later it was on what you could tell
about the it sounds so extraordinary to
say it now given my whole life in a very
practical commercial world but at the
time I was obsessed with knowing what
you could tell about the physical world
simply from April or our reasoning
there's really the debate between the
rationalists philosophers and the
previous yeah
so it's interesting because you your
career did take a very practical turn
but you spent quite a lot of time when
you were young how old were you when you
went off to York hey 19 yeah 19 and did
you is that a more American model
University or more British model did you
have did your University uh program
consist mostly of attending lectures or
were you doing a lot of reading on your
own a lot of reading on around a few
lectures and then a tutorial every week
where you have to write an essay every
week on a subject and debate so it was
more a Cambridge yeah exactly and so and
and you were disciplined enough to be
pursuing these academic Pursuits or
interested enough in the talk yeah to be
pursuing these on your own how much
reading were you doing
um more than anyone at the I just was
obsessed with reading and learning I had
a gap year before going to University
and they sent a reading list out and
which is based I think the whole three
years worth of reading this night I
thought you had to do it before you
arrived so I think I missed off a couple
of books and I remember queuing up on
the admissions day and feeling really
guilty and I said to
um a student in line said have you read
it Dawn they told me I haven't read
anything yet that's what you meant to
read in the next three years
you've got to jump on it yeah yeah and
so and so how did that
experience of old what did that
experience of all that reading do for
you and then how did that set you up
for your eventually more practical
Pursuit how did you make that leap from
the philosophical and contemplative back
into the Practical and like how did that
come about how did you justify that to
yourself or how did that emerge as the
right pathway
yeah it's a good question I I gave up
philosophy because I didn't feel I could
add anything to man's intellectual
history so that I remember being stuck
in the library at Cambridge
it was raining so I went down to the
basement and read the abstracts of all
the phds done in the past 100 years you
know the abstract's the first five pages
and I remember thinking
what I was doing wasn't I I didn't
really have any ideas that merited
spending three to five years of my life
to put in a book so you didn't have a
burning philosophical Revelation at hand
that needed to be worked out you'd
wandered through the territory the other
people had explored but you're there
wasn't yeah yeah yeah yeah because at
some point you have to
decide that you've got something truly
original and creative to add or or
you're done or you just oh you're not
done but you can carry on and you can do
what I call a footnote exercise still
get your PhD but you haven't really
taken things further for Manchester
right right right right yeah so right so
I do that so because I was so good at
philosophy and I had I thought I'd be
good at um law too I didn't have enough
money to to become a lawyer
um so I decided to have a Five-Year Plan
and the background was my mother and
father my mother and father believe in
Commerce even though they weren't
particularly good at it even though they
didn't do much of it but in their in
their blood in their in their belief
they really think that the highest thing
you can do is business and my father my
father didn't like him
and although always supported me thought
philosophy was a kind of waste of time
right just be buying and selling things
and doing business and but he still
supported me in doing that and so I I
wanted to go and work and I'd seen a
trial when I was 13 or 14 at the Old
Bailey which really impressed me with
some barristers and cross-examination
that was a shocking thing for me to see
because I've seen a witness give
evidence and by the time it finished
giving evidence it's called in Chief I
totally believe the witness and then the
the Barrister questioned him I remember
seeing this and I totally disbelieved
him after the questioning so that sort
of ran parallel to this because he's the
endowed issue exactly right so you heard
a story that was perfectly compelling
and then you saw someone tear it into
bits exactly and that was shocking for
me because I totally believed them the
the witness the first time yeah well it
is shocking too when your feelings let's
say are in sync with someone who's
telling a story that makes you
sympathetically oriented to them and
then some attack dog comes along and
says here's all the lies and the
contradictions and none of this is true
and yes it is a shocking it's very
strong and it's not just that you
believe someone it's just that if you
believe someone and you're on the jury
somebody would have gone to prison who
shouldn't have gone to prison
well that's interesting too then that
that means that the stakes are high for
that naive sympathy as well yeah exactly
that naive non-critical sympathy yeah
well it's something so when I came to
Finnish
um university I thought what can I do I
didn't have enough money to do law but I
wanted to do law so I decided to have a
five-year plan which is a bit
a bit extraordinary really looking back
and I decided to qualify as an
accountant which I did specializes how
old were you at this point I had
finished University at around the age of
24 24 okay so they did a five-year plan
which I qualify as an accountant where I
worked made money did my exams qualified
with pricewaterhouse in the city it's
the late 80s the financial sector was
booming there was something called Big
Bang so I learned a lot about business
and banking
upon qualification as planned and
everyone was shocked I jacked it all in
went back to law school for two years
and then the pupilage at the bar where I
became a barrister specializing in
commercial litigation and did you like
being an accountant because that's quite
that's in some ways on the opposite end
of the distribution from philosophy yes
it's so
concentrated on I wouldn't say minutia
but certainly detailed I did I did I did
enjoy it I was an auditor so I was
checking things up so there was a bit
scientific you're trying to prove things
because there's an investigative element
but I think I liked it because I knew I
was doing it for three years or four
years you know three years really right
so it was part of this plan that that
was actually very compelling to you and
so what was the contents of your
Five-Year Plan the content was if I
could become good at I'd get some money
from being an accountant I feel good at
um at business and commerce these are
many of these things are fallacious in a
way I'll I'll come back I'll unpack it
for you in a second and then I'd be able
to go to law school and become a good
lawyer and I'd become an even better
lawyer than most lawyers because most
lawyers don't understand numbers that's
what I believe so you'd have the
philosophical background and you'd have
the detail-oriented numeric background
exactly well there's certain a certain
at least a certain rigor in thinking
that's associated with this with the
arithmetic and the mathematical realm
okay so you've trained as an accountant
and you managed to make some money and
then you went off to law school what law
school it was in London there was a
conversion course in the city London and
then there's a bar school you go to
which is only for barristers for the
second year so it's an Inns of Court
School of Law and then you do your
pupilage I'll go back to the fallacies
though yeah I think because I thought as
good as philosophy I'd be good at
arguing in the law I'm not sure that's
true I am quite good at it but I think
you could be good at it without being
good at philosophy the other fallacy is
you're a better lawyer if you also know
a lot about numbers I'm not sure that's
true about that I think you have to be
an accountant to become a lawyer but but
it's as you say but it did make you some
money I'd make you some money which is
not a fallacy that was real right right
right right and uh it's not an
outrageous fallacy you know it did help
me in life because I saw the thing I
enjoyed most about accounting and little
thing was these all different businesses
every few weeks and
you're in different situations right so
you got to walk through the businesses
yeah exactly and so what kind of
Investigation were you doing as an
accountant into these multiple
businesses well as a occasion I did
investigations if there was a takeover
this is many years ago as you know I'm
quite old now and then but in order you
just have to prove it's like a quite a
scientific process you have to prove the
numbers that they present uh the real
numbers and so you can't check every
number so you have to try and work out
you have to understand the system how
numbers became the numbers how you test
them how many what's the statistical
sample you take that makes it likely to
be the case right so it's applied
epistemology exactly it is yeah do we
really know this do these numbers rep
this is one of the things that's
frightening about the online world and
and and and and and big media companies
who can gerrymander the numbers there's
nothing more Cardinal as an intellectual
sin than to falsify what a number
represents because numbers
there is there isn't any concept that we
have that has a more has a closer
one-to-one concordance with the
structure of the world than numbers so
if you're dealing with someone who is
playing fast and loose with the numbers
that's a very deep sort of intellectual
and I would say too theological sin okay
so you're seeing it you you have
privileged access to a number of
different businesses and you're trying
to find out where the reality is
do you think so going back to what
you're saying do you think numbers is
the closest thing we have to truth well
I think I I think it depends on the kind
of Truth
no but numbers are are
associated with reality in the same way
that music is associated with reality I
mean our agreement on what constitutes
one thing or two things or ten things is
it's pretty fundamental it's grammatical
I suppose yeah and so structural yeah
yeah and it's it's not as if there
aren't other forms of profundity and
there are other forms of higher oh truth
yeah or truth but numbers are numbers
are pretty basic tools and and uh and
the lies that emerge as a consequence of
the falsification of numbers can have
devastating effects so which is of
course why you do your due diligence if
you're a business person and so
the thing is too is the numbers if your
numbers are in order and you have a
business and my numbers are in order and
I have a business you and I can do
business together in a way that's much
less complicated if neither of those
situations are the case exactly and
often when you have I have lots of in my
business side of life
you have lots of ideas and people often
forget about the numbers right so as
soon as you
as Wittgenstein would say bump into
reality or they didn't put it in an
economic sense by looking at the numbers
it's a different term it's a difference
well I I tend to run all the different
Enterprises that I
am engaged in on a for-profit basis for
that reason because things can get
spread out and sprawled and inefficient
and one of the ways of making sure that
doesn't happen is to put that numerical
discipline is this well if this thing
can't thrive on its own then there's
something wrong with it it's now the
fact that something can't be made
profitable isn't an unerring indication
that it shouldn't live but it's one
indication and you need indications that
things shouldn't live I mean one of the
things that can happen to people is that
they'll keep an Enterprise that isn't
thriving limping along
failing to kill it forever and then they
just waste their whole life on something
that well where the numbers don't match
up or you'll see people in the artistic
world because I had lots of clients who
were artistically oriented who are never
able to make a practical
case
for the application of their artistic
Endeavor and they say they'll say things
like well you know I'm not interested in
the numbers I I don't care about the
market I don't want to sell out it's
like you're not conceptualizing this
properly it's another form of
disciplinary strategy and it's actually
a very creative Endeavor if you're an
artist you can be entrepreneurly
oriented entrepreneurs and artists are
very similar in temperaments like no you
don't understand is that the
communication about your artistic
production and its commodification
that's part of the creative process if
you look at it properly it's like or do
what do you want to produce works of art
that no one ever looks at and starve to
death while doing it it's not a very
productive way of thinking it's not a
very productive way of conceptualizing
your artistic role and it's not
sustainable there's a saying by Steve
Jobs which is a real artist Ship by
which he means you actually sell things
you have to move things yeah and if
you're not really
shipping then you're not really an
artist you're just uh something most of
the time you're a poser
and those claims that well I didn't sell
out it's like well that's because you
don't know how to and no one ever
offered you the opportunity yeah and
people often maintain that stance as a
form of moral self-glorification and the
artists that I've worked with people who
did have some artistic talent who had
that attitude all it was was an
impediment for them because there's no
way they could be successful the artists
I've known that were successful
they were really good at fostering
social relationships they were really
good at communicating with clients they
were very good at
helping explain to the people to whom
they might have been trying to sell
their artistic Productions what would
what this would do for their life
because one of the things people want
when they buy a piece of art especially
from a living artist is they kind of
want to be part of the art world the art
life like maybe their nose to the ground
businessman types who have a bit of a
romantic dream somewhere in their psyche
and if they're
if they buy a piece of art and they know
the artist well then they they open
themselves up to that whole romantic
sphere and the artist can I wouldn't say
sell that exactly but that's what he's
bringing to the table and to be
contemptuous of the commercial aspect of
that that's it's a false morality yeah I
agree with you but having said that you
say the artist you know who are
successful because of you there's others
other skills of socializing and
essentially promoting themselves and
Iraq but you was there aren't good and
could you not be a good artist and not
so I'm just this is well it's hard you
you can for sure although I don't know
if you can be a good artist and be
contemptuous of all that right it's but
also maybe you can but how are you going
to keep Body and Soul together while
you're doing it and also if you don't
start to engage to some degree on the
commercial and communicative end you
don't expand out your social network and
I have a uh my sense is that that also
limits your growth as an artist
so
um it's it's better to
it's better to well certainly dispense
with any moral pretensions that sales
and marketing is beneath you it's like
once you're great at it it can beneath
be beneath you but when you don't know
how to do it at all it's not beneath you
you just don't know how to do it and
then the proclivity is to pronounce
yourself as morally Superior because you
know you won't do it it's like isn't
that you won't it's that you can't and
that's that's a kind of crippling hubris
and I've seen lots of people who are
artistically oriented brought down by
that yeah so I I totally agree with you
there's one I remember trying to many
years ago trying to
debate what meaning of an artist is an
ultimately I'd come to the conclusion
it's just somebody who tries to make a
living from selling art and if you're
not making living selling art it's hard
to be an artist right right well how do
you how do you continue your art you're
gonna have maybe you have a patron or an
independent fortune in which case fine
do whatever you want but you're the
proper attitude if you're a creative
person is to integrate the necessity for
making the Enterprise economically
sustaining into the Enterprise and to
consider that as part of the complex
problems that you're trying to address
as an artist it's a way better attitude
and then you can adopt The Meta attitude
that you described which is well of
course I can do this right and I mean
I've seen people make artistic careers
in out of absurd
um Pursuits my I have a friend Jonathan
pajo who's a Orthodox icon Carver and
he's commercially successful at it right
so that's impossible but it can be done
if now it's hard to do but it's not like
there's no pathway forward but you
certainly can't be casual casually
contemptuous of social relationships and
opportunities if you're going to make
something like that happen so yeah the
great artists that I've known they've
been able to dance in the commercial
sphere and so yeah I will talk more
about that maybe about money and art and
value and art and how people's attitudes
yeah well I definitely want to get into
that yes let's talk about your legal
career okay so you you developed
yourself on the account accountant side
and you familiarized yourself with
business and you got your law degree how
did you do in law school and then what
happened I did very well at law school
and I got taken on in the top commercial
Chambers in in London one of the best
commercial Chambers and I just as a
barrister in London you're so
self-employed and um you work in the
chambers which is an address uh you
share the Goodwill of that address so I
just separate Barrister and solicitor
for all the Americans and Canadians who
are watching so yeah it's a good
question you could you take a look for
granted because I know viruses are
people that wear a wig and a gown and
basically go to court and stand up on
their feet and solicitors are
um people who prepare the cases for them
they do other things too but the legal
profession can be split into
essentially you saw at the beginning
between crime and civil crime is the
State against the individual and that's
a totally different skill to civil work
let's go down the Civil road which is
where I went down within the Civil Road
you have two types of solicitors two
types of lawyers you have transactional
lawyers to help you do a contract buy
and sell a home buy and sell a company
right make sure all the everything's in
order on that front and then you have
the litigators who deal in things that
have gone wrong because the the thing
you bought didn't show up or wasn't
authentic or wasn't owned by the person
who sold it right normally in May so the
the the first category is there to stop
the second category from being necessary
exactly and the second category should
normally be a small percentage of the
first category so maybe 10 percent of
lawyers should be
um litigating because most things should
go through normally in America there's a
much higher percentage of litigators it
might even be close to 50 50 I'm not
sure between transactional lawyers this
is down the Civil Road and litigation
lawyers in England maybe 20 to 80.
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
[Music]
that there's something else going on
here that is far more Cosmic and deeper
than what you can imagine the highest
ethical Spirit to which we're beholden
is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of
Freedom against tyranny
I want villains to get punished but do
you want the villains to learn before
they have to pay the ultimate price
that's such a Christian question
and and you ended up on the litigation
I'm on the litigation civil litigation
and I'm the so everything I see in my
professional life has gone wrong every
deal that comes to me is something
that's come to me because there's a
problem it's a good thing that you're
comfortable in chaos because that's
definitely the space that's occupied by
two people who don't agree definitely
constitutes chaos or two entities yeah
okay else like war war is a it is a war
right it's a war yeah so within the the
litigation if you have solicitors you
repair cases historically it's changed a
bit over the past 10 years in England
but when I was when I was practicing
over 30 years ago and still do practice
solicitors would meet the client prepare
take the witness statement get it
already and the Barrister would stand on
his feet in court and present the case
that was the difference so the Barrister
would be like the trial attorney the
advocating court and the solicitors
would be preparing the case for him so I
was a trial attorney with a wig and a
gun
sorry I haven't brought it here today to
show you
um and I did that I've done that for 33
years I haven't been in court for many
years now because I gave it up the trial
the appearance in court after about 10
years
um but I still practice law as
analytication and I had my own Law Firm
going back so I started at the bar and I
was very successful at the bar partly
because I loved it I worked I think for
the first 10 years of my life I worked
12 to 14 hours a day seven days a week
okay so when you say worked how much of
those 12 to 14 hours a day were actual
productive labor
quite a lot but it was a manual
intellectual labor so that um you just
had to sit at your desk it's like a
solitary which I didn't like actually
because I'm quite I like meeting people
utility desk and you have to go through
files of document yeah and find out
what's relevant and what isn't so you
have to do it even and it might be
productive because you find something in
the 10th hour you really have to do the
nine hours to get to the tenth house
well the reason I'm asking is because I
used to ask my undergraduates quite
regularly
how much time every day they waste it by
their own definition of waste and
generally it was something approximating
eight hours and then I would walk them
through that arithmetically because your
time as an undergraduate if you're at a
reasonable University or reasonably
qualified person your time is probably
worth somewhere between twenty and fifty
dollars an hour although your time when
you're young is actually worth more than
that because it compounds but that's not
a bad estimate and so I would point out
to them quite quickly that they were
wasting something on the order of a
hundred and twenty thousand dollars a
year by wasting time every day and that
that wasn't illusory that was a real
waste and also tried to
put forward to them the notion that if
they were going to be successful
if that's what they actually wanted they
would have to learn to be able to work
so that they were actually working
something like 70 to 80 hours a week now
that doesn't mean you have to work like
that your whole life but you certainly
have to learn to work like that and if
you're going to be successful at a
high-end Law Firm you are definitely
going to be working 70 to 8 hours a week
and most of that is actually going to be
work it isn't going to be sitting there
in the library you know leafing through
your phone pretending that you're
studying and so how early on did you
learn to concentrate in a manner that
would enable you to work for those
protracted periods of time from when I
was 18 or 19 I was concentrating I can
just sit the hours at my desk
concentrating I'd have to go for a walk
every hour or two but from very early on
I think
I say very early on but 18 or 19 right
right so you've pretty much had that all
down by the time certainly by the time
you were in law school
yeah I used to go I used to enjoy my
work so much I'd have to pull myself
away at like midnight or two in the
morning only because I knew that if I
didn't get some sleep I wouldn't be able
to work so much the next day yeah yeah
well that's actually the proper
limitation is the the people that I
worked with on the legal front when we
were trying to figure out boundaries for
their work and I saw this among the
scientists that I worked with too who
were great scientists is like well how
much can you work well can you work 18
hours a day well yes but not sustainably
and I found that for example if I'm
writing I can't write for more than
three hours a day if I'm actually
writing I can do other things but if I
start to work more than three hours a
day on writing per se then I start to
Tire myself out and it's
counterproductive so one of the things
you want to do when you're young is find
out how hard you can work
so that that's actually sustainable and
so you have to push yourself past your
limit before you figure that out but
it's a good thing to discover yeah it
really is and to become a good lawyer
in my case anyway I think it was quite
good to do different things so you learn
a lot it's not just you do exercise your
desk it's quite important to socialize
with other lawyers and debate things
with other lawyers you have your tea
breaks and your lunch breaks and so
you're in a little Community especially
at the bar in England because it all
happens in a very small area called the
temple there's a few Inns and they sit
in their rooms there and they go to have
lunch in the same place and they go to
walk around the same Gardens it's all in
a little compound in a sense and uh it's
like so you're also making a community
at the same Community it's like was that
was that was that a conscious decision
to make that community did you know
enough that you needed to do that or
were you driven mostly by the fact that
you like to socialize and that just
emerged naturally yeah it's partly the
structure of the English legal system
barristers uh even to qualify are
obligated to have certain number of
dinners together as part of the
qualification you have to have um you
become a member of an inn and then you
have to have dinners there to qualify
which I found extraordinary in the
beginning but now I think it's quite a
good idea so you're forced to socialize
it's like a little monastic group of uh
um monastic Warriors in a sense who
hired to um you know for clients to do
well in in court again well you have to
have a network to be successful and
that's especially true if you're also
the kind of lawyer who ends up bringing
in business rather than merely doing the
background legal research and work I
mean in in North America I don't know
how much it's the same in England the
lawyers are on the commercial side are
pretty
well divided into the rainmaker types
who are really good at going out and
bringing in new business who also might
be good at research and then the people
who are good at research but can't do
the entrepreneurial work and they're no
we're near as valuable to their
to their firms yeah I mean I as a
barrister you didn't bring any business
in the law you bought some business in
but solicitors brought you the business
historically now it's all changing
um but in in law firms which I will also
have run for about 10 years as well
you're right there's um the so-called
rainmakers and very few lawyers are good
rain makers they may be brilliant
lawyers and often the more brilliant you
are as a lawyer the less like you are to
be a great rain maker because you you
just want to sit and analyze the
arguments all day but to have a good Law
Firm you need different different skills
and maybe to be a good lawyer you need
to have all of those skills but it's
hard to have all of them it's hard to be
um well each of those skills is rare and
so the combat combination of the skills
and Vanishing very rare I mean to be
good at arguing to be good at reading to
be able to sit down and work hard all
day to be a good advocate in court to be
a good cross-examiner because there's
different kinds of Advocates they're
Advocates who are very good on appeal
but not so good with Witnesses um
or by then to be a good litigator and
have that attack dog mentality and
ability and then also to be able to work
harmoniously with your clients that's a
very difficult those are two different
worlds for sure because your client
often is um is in a very difficult
traumatic time of their their lives and
you're going to have to work with them
and then in order to socialize and
network with clients who aren't yet your
clients on the hope that you might get
some work in it requires a lot for one
person to be all that you know yeah and
even in the big law firms um you know
that where there's only solicitors or
trial attorneys I think only one in
every ten Partners will be a real
Rainmaker right right yeah well one of
the things that's very useful on that
front for young people to know if
they're trying to develop their
professional careers when you see
someone who's good at something first of
all you should notice it especially if
they're good at something you're not and
try not to be jealous of it and put it
down you know because there's a moral
Temptation there but people can develop
a wide range of skills if they're
willing to learn from the people who
already have those skills you know I've
seen introverts for example become
extremely sophisticated socially like
they have to kind of learn it
incremental step by incremental step
where the extroverts just have it at
hand but you can even those rainmaking
skills you can develop those if you're
fortunate enough to have a mentor and
and you have enough of a clue to learn
from them the micro elements of what
they're doing can I say two things as I
listen to you talk about that there are
two things that I think about my
practice as a lawyer especially as an
advocate one is you learn most by
actually doing it you can study about it
as much as possible but when you
actually go into battle you learn a lot
more than when you're reading about it
you bump yourself up against the right
obstacles yeah
which is an interesting thing that you
have to do it to learn rather study it
the other interesting thing that's often
puzzle me which I'll ask you because I'm
sure you'll have an opinion on it is why
it is we can learn so much from people
in our lives when even in your own life
when you look back you'll have had some
relatively small conversations with
people that have shaped the way you
think about things and you can learn so
much from a mentor or a person who is
very I've learned a lot from some very
senior
embarrassed as well not even senior
barristers who've told me it's not just
a little trick but their attitude what a
conversation with someone can teach you
more than reading many books why is it
it's so much well we're really imitative
you know and so it's one of the things
that sets human beings off against other
animals most particularly and so you can
literally embody the spirit of someone
else's personality well that's to some
degree you do that in every conversation
because you and I to have this
conversation we have to find a middle
ground where we're basically both we
both are occupied by The Same Spirit you
know and
the more different you are than me when
that conversation occurs the farther I
have to stretch myself to become an
analog of you just to communicate and
that definitely broadens you and so and
we're very good at grasping the whole
and inferring it from Parts I noticed
this was my son for example when he was
about
two and a half or three and we first
sent them off to daycare and there were
my son was quite well behaved uh because
that was a requirement in our household
and he would come but he was also
extremely extroverted and social and
quite disagreeable so he had a will and
uh we'd send him off to daycare and he'd
come back and
he would have learned the most conniving
tricks and just picked them up just like
that and the reason was he was hanging
around some you know bratty kid who had
a whole bag full of Tricks as part of
their personality you can just absorb
that whole thing and he'd come back and
you know try it out and it's it's
that's part of our Fascination let's say
for stories you know when you go to a
movie and you're engrossed in the
character you're essentially what
happens is you adopt the aims of the
character
and then your entire nervous system
swings to make the things that appear as
obstacles to him appear as obstacles to
you and the things that appear as
facilitators to him appear to
facilitators to you and you really you
embody that whole mood of being and play
it out as a dramatic fantasy and then it
shows you that that's a whole new way of
looking at the world that's why we love
stories so much in drama and a mentoring
experience is like that is because that
you you can you essentially imitate the
person that you're with that's
interesting and that's why you can't
just you know somebody can tell you it
orally as a person as a mentor or you
can read in the book but the mentor you
will take it in yeah well the mentorship
has that it's it's the dramatic
imitative element that comes along with
it you know you might think that being a
lawyer for example and Thomas Kuhn
talked a lot about this in relationship
to science it's like well what is
science well it's a set of facts it's
like yeah
the facts change so that's dubious to
begin with but it's also a practice well
what's the practice well it's a list of
skills it's like there's no such thing
as a list of skills you know you that's
partly why we haven't so far been able
to come up with expert diagnostic
systems for example they are getting
better now but for a long time they were
useless whatever
uh an illness is isn't a list of
symptoms discriminable from other some
other list of symptoms there's an active
diagnosis and an art and a lot of that's
not explicit it's a kind of drama and
the only way you can develop that skill
is to imitate it so if you're a
scientist you have an apprenticeship and
it's in the apprenticeship that you
learn to imitate the spirit of Science
and we have no idea how to reduce that
to a set of rule-bound practices we have
no idea made a lot of that in this
structure of scientific revolutions no
one you're very fortunate if you have
mentors in your life because you can
copy them and it's not just that the
mental empowers information to you by
just advice I mean my at the bar you had
to have a year of being a pupil an
apprentice and you had a pupil master
and you'd think in the room I was
fortunate to have a fantastically clever
people master
and I started and I thought no he's
going to teach me a lot and there's my
um my master it's this old-fashioned
language I remember saying that I'd say
Mark uh what I'd ask him a question and
he'd say oh where's it say you tell me
right and then I'd go and I'd think
about research and I come back I say I
found the answer to my question
and they said what is it and I tell him
it he said no try again
and so he never actually told me
anything but he just kept me on my toes
the whole time right yeah well and you
never know to what degree hanging around
him brought the right questions to mind
right because we don't really know how
that mentorship relationship
we don't know how it transforms you
cognitively and it might it a lot of the
most important thing in any discussion
is what the pertinent questions are
rather than what the relevant answers
are so totally in the law especially I
often thought being a good lawyer is
asking the right questions once you ask
the right questions there's a saying in
the law often people say to judges one
only has to ask the question to know the
answer once you've asked the question
Things become a lot yeah
there's another thing that happens this
is a slight detour in them in asking
questions in an adversarial situation so
you might send somebody in to interview
someone or to do something and you say
don't give anything away and they always
or very often naively say we won't give
anything away because we're only going
to ask questions yeah right yeah yeah
yeah the questions are loaded with
information yes definitely definitely
definitely so now you became very
successful as a litigator and so what
led to your success and do you have some
stories at hand about about well
Adventures that you
that you undertook well well engaged in
the litigation practice
yeah I'll see a lot of the stories I
have
of confidential but um like talk in
generic terms I did them after a while
give up the bar and go and work as a
sort of pro as a as a manager for um
people that had lots of litigation
problems so that gave me the opportunity
to manage lots of lawyers rather than
being a lawyer I became a sort of
um a crisis manager and I've acted for
all sorts of normally very wealthy
people or companies with huge commercial
problems but it's often on the edge of
Commerce and other problems because if a
wealthy person really does have um a
problem and it's normally a huge problem
for them if it's if they involve me if
they need to come to me it's normally
here a real crisis then you're dealing
with like I said earlier a client who's
can lose everything is everything really
often they're concerned about their
reputation then they're concerned about
the money their lifestyle
so I did I did one particular case for
probably the wealthiest guy in the world
where I had to manage a lot of
litigation
I think I instructed something like 73
law firms and 13 different countries and
fought and settled over 500 different
cases and that was all about a lifestyle
over what span of time seven years yeah
how many cases over 500 different
courses
that's a lot of chaos yeah it's a lot of
chaos and you become good at
that made me good
as a lawyer because I became a client
because I had lots of Cl lots of lawyers
I had to deal with and try and get the
most out of them because I was
representing the client and I lived in
the Far East in that particular case for
seven years and there's a kind of quite
a good attitude as well in the forest
because there was I was always being
challenged by I remember there was one
particular Chinese guy who had to work
with the Lord who had always and you
know I like being challenged and I like
challenging myself and he challenged me
even more he said why not why can't we
do this why can't we do that and so I
learned a lot in in those cases but
sometimes in those cases you had to
there were cases from
you know car companies plane companies
Banks from you know blackmail cases
blackmail cases become you know quite
common well they're always around now
but there's me too type cases that are
recently sometimes they're obviously
married in them sometimes there isn't
you know ever yeah well it's got a lot
of power in the hands of accusers
exactly and you know I've seen cases
where the accusers were absolutely you
know made up you know yeah and and not
you know but it's crazy one thing is a
as a barrister ethically you're not
allowed to
um
not take a client on because you don't
um you know because you have to there's
something called the cab rank rule so
you just take clients on irrespective of
your belief in there right because
they're entitled to a defense yeah which
is very important they're entitled to a
defense I think that's really really
important I've always taken clients on
and never you know even if
well sometimes people think they're
guilty and they're not that's tricky you
know I saw that in Psychotherapy all the
time as people would convict themselves
at a second notice and I would look into
it and I'd think
actually you know this wasn't nearly as
much your fault as you're you know
because you think well you should take
responsibility for your actions and fair
enough but there are errors in that
direction too is you should take
responsibility for your actions but the
presumption of innocence also applies to
you even if you and are inclined to be
guilty and so that principle that you
should take on every client as a lawyer
it's a good principle you never know
what the story is until you get to the
bottom of it I remember early on one of
these dinners that I was compelled to go
to you know when I started out at
Lincoln's Inn where I remember there's
one of the leading criminal barristers
um who did all the top murder cases and
rape cases and we're all having dinner
with him and one of the students said to
him how do you feel defending someone
you know to be guilty or you believe to
be guilty and he said quickly it's a
brilliant Barrister it's not dead he
said I feel relieved
what do you mean he said because there's
nothing worse than representing someone
you believe to be innocent because you
can only screw it up but if you believe
they're guilty and you still do your
best
it's not so bad if you you know if
something happens they go it's um if you
believe if you believe they're innocent
and you screw it up it's a disaster
right right whereas you still do your
best both ways but it puts a lot of
pressure on you you're believing
somebody is innocent yeah well it's an
open question too in any complex
situation it's like well guilty of what
exactly because the devil's always in
the details there's so famous ads if I
can interject for a second
um which I saw once I don't know if it's
famous but it's famous in my mind put it
that way it's a guy who's trying to get
some
um clients for Defense work and criminal
defense work and the ad is it's a big
poster and says just because you did it
doesn't mean you're guilty ring me right
it doesn't because there's a lot of
things I've been thinking you've done it
or even doing it and actually being
proved guilty of it you know yeah yeah
well it's also necessary for people who
are who find themselves in hot water
legally and ethically to sort things out
for themselves so that they know where
they took the wrong steps I mean the the
goal of analyzing a a piece of
misbehavior let's say if the goal is
atonement what that means is you have to
know exactly
where you stepped wrong right from the
beginning of the process and that means
you also have to know where you're
guilty but about things that were
actually peripheral to the event or
maybe
you shouldn't have been guilty about
them at all it's like no this is the
Cardinal mistake this is the mistake
this is the pathway this is what you're
guilty of not these things this is what
anyone would have done in your situation
because lots of times people will do
something that looks terrible on casual
glands and may even be terrible but you
listen to the full account you think oh
if I was in that situation I would have
done something far worse right and then
that makes the whole notion of guilt
much more complex you know I mean
there's a woman who's in jail at the
moment in the U.S who
um
who killed a man who had
repeatedly exploited her violently
sexually and then posted the videos
online and profited from them it's like
well she definitely killed him she shot
him I believe in court but now was she
guilty well there's a complicated
probably of something she got herself in
that situation and for however she
managed that and then couldn't
disentangle herself from it and that's
not good so obviously
you would presume some culpability on
her part in that entire sequence but
trying to entangle that that's quite the
bloody Rat's Nest that is unfortunately
I didn't ever get involved in I try I
don't like judging people I didn't think
it's in my job I didn't think it's right
I just have to represent them and do the
best I can for them obviously without
misleading the cold
but I don't like judging people part of
all the reasons you're kind of alluding
to it's kind of complicated knowing
who's guilty of what and there's an
older I think it's a Russian proverb
that says don't judge people because
it's too flattering to the devil I don't
know exactly but I think it means that
you're giving too much credit to the
devil right right well the devil is the
adversary that's the fundamental That's
what Satan means the word is adversary
and and so yeah well one of the things
you learn if you're a clinician and you
have any sense it's also it's also why
you don't offer people advice it's like
I don't know what the hell you should do
like maybe you and I could figure it out
together with some really careful
thought but I can't most people are in
situations that are sufficiently complex
so that casual advice is just not
helpful at all and there's a real
arrogance in that it's the same
arrogance of judgment it's like yeah
well judgments often bolstering yourself
up really yeah for some comparative
advantages I hate I hate the idea of
judging I myself never ever be a
contender would never want to be a judge
some of my um colleagues at the bar went
on some of my closest friends are Judges
and they're happy and they're doing
great jobs as judges but I just couldn't
do that job yeah yeah it'd be
interesting to talk to a judge with a
lot of experience to find out how they
navigate the moral pitfalls of being in
that position and how they reconcile
themselves to it given this sort of
complexity that we're describing I
expect they say and rightly so their
role is to judge Society these people
like them to judge and they do their
best to judge honestly and Faithfully
within the law yeah and so it's an
important role something it is it is but
it does set up these moral conundrums
that we've been describing now as your
career as a litigator developed as your
career as a litigator developed you also
developed an interest in the world of of
of Art and particularly Modern Art yeah
and so how did that develop in parallel
and developed
really because of
I'm not I've always loved art and I've
always felt it's important and then I
started buying art for like 25 bucks or
50 bucks and I've been in fact you know
years ago when I was even 18 or 19. so I
believed in art what were you buying oh
just things in the local reference
library done by old ladies of flowers
and stuff I just talk about original art
yeah yeah
um and then as I became more successful
and made money I like to you know buy
some art and I got friendly with artists
I was I was obsessed
with the
creative process and also the economics
of creativity which really fascinates me
um in the art world you can get two
extremes of people you get people who
are just think that money is disgusting
should have nothing to do with art and
it's purely about sort of
um critical theory and Aesthetics and
history and stuff on the other hand you
get people who really don't care about
um
about endings of the art they just know
how much it's uh how much they can set
it for and how much they can buy so yeah
but I personally have just always been
fascinated in that relationship between
how you can turn an idea into money and
the economics of equal the economics and
creativity which I find really
fascinating so by chance I was lucky
enough to get friendly with some artists
an artist have a difficult job as you
know because they are
I believe bearing their soul to the
world to be judged yeah right so it's a
very hard
job in hard philosophies because you
have to figure you have to do your
paintings normally you have a show
people come and they like them or they
don't you sell them with it and all the
self-doubt and it's a lonely job so you
don't have many people to to hang out
with normally so it's a difficult job
and so they're not normally very good at
Commerce not normally and if they are
they might not be great artists if
they're just good at some selling their
paintings they may or may not be good
but you have to appreciate the
importance of that system but I was so I
got friendly with some artists and
they'd say they'd ask me I'm also
because of my philosophical and
scientific background I was always
trying to and my Commercial background
trying to work out what the right what
the right thing is and the relationship
between money and art and that's
something that's I've been involved in
now for 25 years and I've been obsessed
with it really
um trying to understand it and so I just
got into it because by accident I got
friendly with an artist and he asked me
some he asked me to help him out on
various things and that's grown to me
managing more and more artists by
managing it's really advising giving
them commercial advice and that's not
necessarily how to make the most amount
of money it's um it's what's to do
that's best for your art and your legacy
because there is a development of a
career exactly and um there are all
sorts of
art is such a fantastically interesting
subject because it means so many things
as we will hopefully discuss now it can
mean so many different things and to so
many different people and it's very
spiritually important to some people to
other people it's just Commerce some art
can be Beauty some art may not be Beauty
it may be subjective objects all these
different things and then there's the
market which is you know so fascinating
and one's attitude to Art and I think
these are the things that um I remember
the first one of the first valuable
paintings I bought I was so happy and I
loved it so much and then a week or two
later I realized that the people who
sold it to me had ripped me off and it
wasn't worth what I thought it was worth
and then when I looked at that painting
it just represented me being had and um
I am I no longer love the painting
anymore I just looked at it so the
relation between money and art is it
well that's the relationship between
context and perception too because now
you saw that
the same object you know through a
completely different lens what an art
what an artistic production is as an
object is extremely complex with that's
what Duchamp was playing with when he
put the urinal in the gallery is that
well
if it's in a gallery is it a piece of
art that turned out with duchamp's
urinal that the answer to that at least
eventually was most definitively yes but
people are cynical about that move on
his part but it was actually brilliant
because
I I've often thought this for example in
the case of museums imagine there's a
museum there that has Hank Williams or
Elvis Presley's guitar well let's say
it's a mass manufactured guitar it's
like well
now you have his display case and
Elvis's guitar is in there but
perceptually in some real manner it's
not distinguishable from any other
guitar of that period
so then you might say well what's the
reality of the fact that this was
Elvis's guitar like where is that
reality because it's not in the
perceptual landscape it's in the
it's in the shrine that's been built
around it it's in people's memory and
that's what Duchamp was playing with too
it's like well what's a piece of art
well often you find them in museums well
if we
raise something ordinary to the status
of something in a museum
to what degree does that now become a
piece of art and that is definitely an
open question and a very complex
question and it's a sophisticated
question you ran right into that with
your painting it's like when you were
viewing it through the lens of having
made a successful social and economic
transfer the painting was one thing and
when that fell apart the painting was
something else and that in itself is
quite interesting well the object is
always a
interplay of whatever it is and whatever
you are as the reader of it and that can
modify
exactly and dissolved
and and there's another thing that
happens in the art World which is
there is obviously one school of thought
that says the commodification of Art and
art and money corrupts are but in a
sense it also saves that because um
people can appreciate I mean they say if
you're painting that you have in your
home is worth money you look after it
you don't uh you you make sure it's
handled and framed properly and it makes
sure it survives and people so you know
are to have an economic value is
important for its survival I believe
sometimes
um
so those are the side of questions with
the artist so what What attracted you
initially to these original pieces of
art that you were buying and why did you
think you had enough courage to rely on
your own taste because one of the things
I've observed about people's
relationship to Art is people are
terrified of art especially of
purchasing it because just as the artist
Bears their soul in the creative
production the
the consumer Bears their Tate soul in
the form of their taste now manifested
as that purchase and people are very
terrified to do that so why did you have
enough confidence to
be attracted to the pieces you were and
then to and then to purchase them
I didn't know the answer to that maybe
it goes back to the subjects we're
talking about the confidence I had in
myself given to me for my mother and
father going to you know I just when I
intrinsic content in my judgment I do
believe that the I as it's called in the
art world or the aesthetic sense or I is
a kind of muscle that you can develop
yeah and if you look at enough things
enough times and you don't just look at
great things you look at things that are
rubbish and bad and you and you question
which as you know I love doing what's
good and why it's good and and what's
bad and why it's bad I I've done eBay
treasure hunts for like 20 years and
I've I think I may have looked at more
bad paintings than anyone else because I
looked at at least a thousand to two
thousand paintings a night for like 10
years and I developed quite an eye for
catastrophically bad art which is really
useful right because once you know the
junk landscape and there's millions of
bad paintings on eBay like literally
just endless supply of them a good
painting will just go it'll just snap
out and think whoa okay well I don't
know that isn't what the rest of this is
and you do develop that
you you develop your eye as you said by
continual exposure which is why taking
art history courses and so forth is so
useful it is but obviously Fashions
change everything changes but I do
believe you and I seem to agree that
that eye the aesthetic sense can be
trained like a muscle well then you can
apply it to the whole world which is
unbelievably useful to decorating your
house and to put placing your furniture
into arranging chairs at a dinner and
yeah yeah you well you know to a large
degree what each of us as moderns even
regards as beautiful
think well that's obviously beautiful
it's like no no some artists figured out
that was beautiful and taught you how to
see that or taught the people you
learned to see from that that was
beautiful like most people now regard
impressionist Landscapes is sort of
self-evidently beautiful but no one
thought that when they were first
produced and the whole notion that even
there is such a thing as Beauty and
Landscape that was that was by no means
self-evident before artists figured it
out exactly and it's the same with many
other genres of Art but um
I think
yeah and I agree but getting back to
your questions how do you have the
confidence develop
generally yeah you you build up your
aesthetic sense but of course there's
this other self there's this other
delusional thing that people have which
is everyone thinks they've got a good
idea a good um eye so not everyone but
most people do so the classic thing a
dealer an art gallery will do when you
go in and there's 10 paintings and you
choose one they'll always say to you oh
you've got a good eye and of course you
want to believe you've got to do that so
you have to be careful not to not to
believe that you have a good eye and to
doubt yourself as well the other thing
to do which I think is important in art
is um if you're really trying to buy
great art is which is hard to Express
properly but it's originality if it's
simply copying other art it may still be
beautiful and it may still be valuable
but it's unlikely to be as valuable as
the impressionist in 1863 or whatever it
was yeah because they were doing
revolutionary revolutionary which was
hard to accept then but with time that
becomes amazing it's also difficult
to separate out
original from merely shocking
because if it is original it will be
shocking because it'll force you to
perceive something and I think Cuba
start the Cuba start from the 1920s
actually still has that power a
particularly good Cubist piece you'll
think that really there is really
something radically different about that
and good Cubist pieces are pretty damn
rare but
much of what passes for modern
originality is always merely shocking
now all that disappears in the Flux Of
Time very rapidly and only what was
truly original remains but it's not an
easy thing to distinguish between the
merely shocking and the original early
you seem to have managed that to some
degree I mean
you do
I think there's some reason to think
that you do have a good eye for
originality and so how do you
distinguish between the original and and
say the merely shocking
I think
it's again training your eye to look at
lots and lots of things and if you come
across something that you've never seen
before
that automatically make you think about
it and then it has to kind of
touches already you're thinking it's
original then it has to touch you in a
way I I generally
you can tell if an artist generally is
just trying to be shocking because uh to
grab attention or if it's just trying to
create beauty or something important I
say you can tell I don't know how you
can tell but I can tell yeah well you
you did you you did you did lay out how
you tell though I mean if you want to
learn how to judge impressionist
Landscapes let's say
you could start by looking at ten
thousand of them and what you're doing
is you're building up an implicit
vocabulary because you're you're tuning
a set of perceptual networks so imagine
you have a set of a thousand
impressionist paintings there's
something about them that makes them
impressionist paintings let's say rather
than Renaissance realist paintings
now what that is is whatever's at the
core of impressionism say versus any
other genre of art but that's not
definable the only way you're going to
figure that out is by exposing yourself
to a multitude of exemplars and
extracting the gist perceptually that's
like tuning an AI Network you can't
express what it is but you can learn to
see it and then you can learn to see so
imagine there's a thousand impressionist
paintings some of them are more
canonical those would be the
masterpieces some of the more more
Central to the spirit of the
impressionist Endeavor you can learn to
identify those but not without not
without going through not without doing
it not without going through the effort
of looking at endless exemplars of
paintings and I suppose if you're really
approaching it systematic which I do
you'd also look at the market and what
the market says about value as well
because that is some it's a pointer it's
a pointer it's an indication but not on
its own there's something that you know
often the debate as you know in art is
is it his Beauty objective for
um subjective forget about beauty is
let's call it Beauty there's a debate
about whether art has to be beautiful or
not which we probably will both accept
doesn't have to be mutual it has to be
meaningful and touch you it doesn't
maybe you disagree with that but let's
come back to that on beauty is it
objective is often not beautiful exactly
but the horrifying often yeah but you'd
have to accept it's great Arts I think
yeah yes yes right so is it objective so
the view I formed and then maybe I may
be wrong about it but this is my
currently firmly held view is that
there's a kind of collective
subjectivity or even objectivity in art
so if you asked 100 people if I took um
you into a room with 10 paintings done
by the same artists or one meter Square
I think there'd be a real consensus
about which was the best one we did this
we actually did this formally I did this
with Harvard the student of mine Shelly
Carson we were trying to
develop objective measures of artistic
production so one of the things we did
was have
well-established artists
rate collages we had ordinary people
make with the same kit so your goal in
our experiment was to make a collage out
of this kit of pieces and then we had
artists rate them for quality and then
you can find out if there's anything
objective by seeing if there's a
similarity in the rank orderings across
the artists and the similarity was quite
stunning
so there's a an index called Alpha
reliability which is the say the average
correlation across a set of rankings and
it was extremely high the artists could
very reliably distinguish the high
quality
collages from the low quality collages
and so there's and now is that objective
well it's it's
transcends the subjective I mean it's
it's not exactly objective because if
it's so clearly dependent on the
existence of a perceiver but you do have
cross perceiver similarity and that's a
well that's a form of objective reality
that's what I think too it's more than
subjectivity yeah I mean it's a sort of
collective belief and what's right of
course there'll be one or two and a
hundred or ten that will disagree with
you but generally there's a consensus
amongst well otherwise we couldn't even
have a category of art because well you
could just throw a frame around anything
and it would instantly be art it's like
no we the mere fact that we have a
category of art means that we
distinguish some images reliably from
others now why we don't know exactly
beautiful might be one but but but
I think part of what art does is produce
revolutionary transformations in your
perception towards something like the
good and there's all sorts of different
ways that can occur I mean Goya is a
good example because his representations
are so often horrific and
um Hieronymus Bosch is another example
of exactly that I mean there's Beauty in
the craftsmanship and also perhaps in
the palette but the details are
horrifying beyond belief but those
artists are compelling you to look past
that which
they're they're compelling you to look
past the even the comfortable emotional
limitations of your current perceptions
and so they're the the great artists are
they're Geniuses of perception
fundamentally they teach you new ways to
see okay while seeing you just look at
the world it's like yeah I know what
seeing is a lot more complicated than
just looking at the world yeah that's
what I think they help you relate to the
world to help you get through life often
and see the world in a different way as
you help you discriminate between that
which is of quality in that which is of
not not of quality and they help you see
things you otherwise wouldn't see
I once came back to a subject you
touched on earlier which is um
in choosing art and hanging it on your
wall you're exposing yourself in a way I
remember a famous a very well-known art
dealer telling me that you can tell a
lot about someone from their art
collection I remember thinking yeah that
makes sense but and I've got a few ideas
of what you can tell but uh
it I think it's true but I can't quite
work out what it means do you know what
I mean that's like a and one that you
can tell from an art collection is from
the style you can probably tell that
they're just buying what they're told to
buy yes and so also tell if they're
trying to match their Furniture exactly
so they're more interior decorators you
know
um but I don't know what else you can
tell but I I do believe that you can
tell a lot but I couldn't enumerate
everything you can tell them why yeah
does that make sense well I think it's
probably as difficult to figure out what
an art collection reveals about the
collector as it is to figure out what
the art itself represents yeah I think
it's
and that's it's partly I suppose because
people have all sorts of different
motives for why they collect art I mean
I collect art because I collected Soviet
realist art
to some I collected a lot of it
partly because I was extremely
interested in the pieces as historical
artifacts and then I was interested in
the war between propaganda and the
artistic tendency that each canvas
represented because a lot of the Soviet
realist artists were very technically
proficient and skilled as artists but
then they were forced to serve as
propagandists and so you have this
terrible tension and they often painted
in essentially an impressionist style
wasn't exactly realist it was it was
much more an impressionist style this
terrible tension in the canvas between
what's what's really incredibly high
level artistic ability and this narrow
propagandistic window so those canvases
are a real battle between two opposing
spirits and so they're very intense
things to have around you you know like
a beautiful portrait portrayal of Lenin
sitting by a window while a child plays
a violin that's a complicated object
because Lenin was a complete bloody
monster and yet you have the amalgam of
this beautiful impressionist light and
this extremely well-designed canvas and
so my house was full those paintings
that was which was Vera there's a lot of
tension in that even
socially because of course people would
come into the house and wonder what the
hell I was doing having these like eight
foot portraits of Lenin up on the wall
and
um
there's all sorts of I personally I
personally love what what you collect
and I love those um communist propaganda
posters I love the the shapes and the
people and the colors and well they were
also very effective often very effective
means of propagandization and so that
was a place where art whatever the
impulse of art is was harnessed for
political purposes one of the things I
also loved about those canvases is that
as we move away from the Soviet Union
the art wins they become less and less
pieces of propaganda at all because well
you don't you know at some point 300
years in the future people won't even
know who Lenin was but the painting
insofar as it's an artistic
success the painting will still exist
all that'll be left is the art all of
the propaganda will have vanished maybe
I mean maybe
I mean sometimes as time goes by things
don't become more valuable there may
still be they are there but there's a
common belief which changes through time
but a common belief that for
ah now to be really great art the artist
must be unfettered and just applies mine
to whatever he wants to and as soon as
you try and control it by getting to do
a commission or getting him to do a
portrait or get I say him or her or
getting them to um do propaganda it
corrupts the art of the artist and the
value of it does that make sense well I
think my experience with artists I've
been I've worked with one artist for a
very long time very intently
commission for me is more like a
collaboration it's like well I don't
want to get in his way because he's the
artist I'm not so I work with this
native Carver for example from the west
coast and I really like his work and
normally when I commission something we
go look at where it might be placed and
I talk about what he's engaged in and he
asked me what sort of things I'm
interested in and what I'm sort of
envisioning there and we come up with a
story that he will represent and so
there's no warping of his artistic
oh there's no warping of the artistic
Enterprise there because I don't tell
them what to do we come up with an
interesting project and then pursue it
and his some of that is ideational
discussion but I'm certainly and I think
this is the right way to handle business
negotiations in general it's like if I
want to do business with you
I don't want to just tell you what to do
that you're definitely the wrong guy for
the job if I'm just telling you what to
do I would rather that we have a
discussion that progresses to the point
to we're both very thrilled with what
we're going to do together and then if
you happen to be an artist we found this
even Tammy and I when we we've done a
lot of renovation projects a lot of them
fairly artistically oriented with all
the Craftsmen if we would sit down with
them and tell them what we were
envisioning and what the goal was and
then ask them for their input and about
what how they thought that what they
were doing might contribute to that
they'd get on board and then all their
creative
uh energy would be released and there
was no subordination of the artistic
process to the commission at all quite
the contrary could you imagine a
situation where there would be a
subordination and therefore a corruption
in there oh yes I think so I mean I
think if you're ordering the artist
around for example well you're certainly
not going to get the best out of them I
know because you you can easily
interfere with the
you can easily interfere with the uh
the manifestation of that creative
spirit and you do that by subjecting it
to constraints that are tyrannical you
don't do that by subjecting it to
constraints
in fact you you actually often
facilitate creativity by imposing the
right set of constraints but if they're
tyrannical constraints well that doesn't
help at all I agree with you and I've
seen that in some of the artists I've
helped in the past that some constraints
can be useful and they regard that as an
artistic challenge yes definitely yeah
whereas other ones can be innocent I'm
not painting a you know a particular
thing because you want me to because
that's just too much is tyrannical yeah
but I don't know how far I how far you
go before it becomes tyrannical but well
I I think you're trying to what you're
trying to do if you're working with an
artist and you have any sense is you're
you're trying to feel out your movement
forward so that they're inspired and
enthusiastic about the project because
that inspiration and enthusiasm is part
and parcel of the spirit that is allied
with your creativity you know so if I'm
talking to Charles this artist that I
was describing you know um he's
developed designing a totem pole for me
a 40-foot totem pole for outside my
Cottage up in Northern Toronto and he
asked me you know what I've envisioned
and I've had an idea for a totem pole in
my mind for a long time and it involves
a representation of chaos at the bottom
in the form of fighting serpents and I
know in their tradition they have this
sea pseudo figure that's a serpent and
so I talked to him about the emergence
of order from chaos and the dragon as a
representation of chaos and we walked
through the whole totem pole but it's a
dance because I'm really interested in
for example if I discuss an idea with
Charles an image will pop into his mind
because he's very obviously image
oriented you know if he looks at a block
of wood he can see the sculpture in it
which is apparently a talent
Michelangelo had in relationship to
Marble but
it's a it's a dynamic play with his Muse
most fundamentally and you can't subject
that to arbitrary constraints because
you'll just destroy it it's it has to be
a form of play and a commission should
be
if you want to tell the artist what to
paint then you should just do the
painting yourself it has to be a dance
right and you could invite an artist and
and like I had a friend who was a
portrait artist and
he would take commissions for portraits
but no he wanted to paint the portrait
and so there has to be a
you can't say it has to be exactly like
this and this is where the figures have
to be portrayed you're not the artist
if you want that artist to paint your
portrait you have to invite him in and
to figure out how you can do that
together so he's thrilled to do it so
his creative spirit is Unleashed and
that isn't no constraint it's just not
the
stupid tyrannical constraints that put
you in a morally Superior position in
relationship to the artist yeah there
comes a point when the commissioner is
the artist if he's telling exactly yeah
some of the greatest art that's been
done often there's different though
there's art that's like a painting you
hang on the wall and there's art that's
part of a structure it's not um or it's
going in a particular place and so when
Michelangelo do the you know the Sistine
Chapel you know he in a way he's already
been told how big his piece is and where
it's going right you know roughly the
subject matter so there are constraints
even on that and that's a great work of
art yeah yeah yeah yeah but I mean we
are always putting constraints on each
other when we're negotiating but I think
the the optimal constraints are more
like the rules for the game rather than
prohibitions against what can and can't
be done it's like let's let's play this
particular game we'll open up this
Horizon of possibility and that it's a
dance and a balancing act too
to undertake the commission properly I
mean I've had a very productive what I
told Charles when we first started
working together because I really liked
his art I said look you make the best
piece you can and send it to me every
three months and tell me what you think
it's worth
and all see how that works and worked
great you know he'd send me a great
piece every three or four months and I'd
think wow this is a great piece and that
was that and then when I built the third
floor on my house which is full of
native art I had him come out to Toronto
and I sort of told them what we were
thinking about with regards to the place
and we started to you know brainstorm
about how that might look and that was
extremely productive too there was more
constraints on them because well the
ceiling was a certain height etc etc but
there can't be no enabling principles
there can't be no constraints that's not
that's not correct let me ask you
another question connected to this but
probably different
what what role do you think art has in a
person's well-being or why is it
important to look at all to think about
or to maybe buy on
forget about artists it's a burning bush
to me well in in this in The Exodus
story Moses is just wandering around
long-minding his business let's say and
something glimmers on the side of his
vision
and it's this Burning Bush it's
something that tracks his attention
right so he goes to investigate it then
he inquires into it he looks more and
more deeply into it he asks it's casket
he asks the phenomena that he can't look
away from its name and it reveals itself
as the ground of being and I would say
well that a painting a piece of art is
an invitation
into an inquiry into the ground of being
and so a great painting will break your
frame of reference so that's what Van
Gogh's
flower paintings do the iris let's say
so very very famous painting
there's no limit to how much you can
apprehend a flower it's it's a
revelation of being now most of the time
what happens is that we don't see the
flower we see our memory of the flowers
we've seen and an artist will go
twist it and then represent the flower
to you and remind you that there's way
more to the world than you're casually
perceiving so that's a window through
your presuppositions into the ground of
being and that is a that's an invitation
into the realm of the Gods and I don't
mean superficially and I don't mean
metaphoric I mean literally now we know
something about this on the perceptual
front now so psychedelics for example
chemically they strip your perception of
memory and that means the whole world
floods in and that's overwhelming well a
piece of art is a it's a micro
it's a micro dose of a psychedelic
that's a perfectly fine way of thinking
about it and what it does is it it
strips your
it strips your perception of memory and
you look at the painting and you know
how you develop a relationship with a
great painting across time you know it's
that it it's like we know for example
that people use the parts of their brain
that they perceive people with and
living objects to perceive musical
instruments they're not dead things and
paintings are like that too a painting
if it's deep and good like a piece of
music it's something you establish a
relationship with and it it always
reminds you that there's more to what is
than what you merely perceive and to be
surrounded by great artists to be
reminded of that all the time and you
know that can be too much when people
used to walk into my house which had
like 500 paintings in it they were just
absolutely everywhere it was like my
mother who's less
open on the artistic front she'd always
ask me kind of disturbed her she said
well why do you want to live in a museum
you know my answer would be well I why
wouldn't you want to live in a museum I
want these windows to
the underlying reality of things open
everywhere so that can shine through but
it is a lot you know it's it's a lot to
ask of people I think we have 40 colors
in our house at that point at the same
time so it was quite the sticky color
well one of the artists that I had
bought a number of paintings from helped
us he was also an interior designer and
he came in and
we used 30 I think it was 38 colors in
the house it was a very small house too
and they were very harmoniously arrayed
but it was quite the and they were
subtle Smoky colors you know it wasn't
it wasn't uh
fluorescent a fluorescent landscape it
was as subtle as 38 different colors
could be but he was a master of Harmony
of color you know in every room every
doorway
was a different juxtaposition of wool
we'll see if you've been an artist and a
good interior designer then
well I think in I think anything you do
can be raised to this status of Art
the better you are at it and if you're a
great interior designer well you're
definitely
encroaching on the territory of Fine Art
that's funny one of the artists I I
managed says that himself he says
anything done really well yeah well
that's what art means is Art means
art means
spectacular skill and so oh you can see
that among Craftsmen I mean this is
partly why I like working with high
level Craftsman renovating houses is
that if the if you don't think those
people are artists you're not paying
attention and as soon as you start
treating them
like their artists and recognizing that
man you get you get their best work out
of them I mean the third floor we built
Toronto all the Craftsmen just went Way
Beyond above and beyond the Call of Duty
because they were so excited about
participating in the project and that
just means every single corner is
beautiful it's so fun
so I think you're saying and I agree
with it that it's important to connect
to something the something because you
would say Transcendent if you if you
don't look at Art and appreciate that
you're not connecting to forces outside
of you right and you need to because you
need to get narrowed otherwise and and
bitter and shallow and and warped and
Tiny and none of that's good the artists
will blow the
unnecessary barriers off your
perceptions and you might think well
that's not necessary it's like it's
necessary if you don't want to get
narrowed to the point where there is
nothing of you left
you know so I I find out helps me get
through life
I I I help you just live free yeah it's
such an important thing for me it's not
optional and people who think it's
optional are blind in a very fundamental
way if to think about it as some it's
it's actually the point it's not only
not optional it's the point an artist
and an art is the point because it
points to something higher that's what
art does and there's ways of technically
discussing what constitutes higher too
because modern people especially the
post-modernist types well there's no
difference between high and low it's
like
if you were low enough you wouldn't
think that believe me so you'd know
pretty damn quick that high is better
than wherever the hell you've ended up
and art is definitely a pointer to
what's highest yeah I agree but also it
helps you question yourself helps you
know understand the world around you in
a way even if it's not to a higher level
to any level it just helps you
um communicate with people and think
about things in a way so it's very to me
it's very important I think one thing
that often annoys me about
about some governments or
people who approach things in a very
Commercial Way is they neglect the
commercial value of Art and it's the
economic value because it's also it's so
and it's so uneconomic it's one of the
things I just that just that hurts me
about conservatives it's like
who who dispense let's say with beauty
it's like there isn't anything more
economically valuable than Beauty think
about Europe and and the beauty of its
most beautiful Productions it's
infinitely valuable and not only that
it's going to become more so as we
progress into the Future these great
cities like Bruges for example which is
so beautiful it just breaks your heart
when you go there it's like there's no
it's inexhaustible economic value and so
the notion that it's that it's uh you
know an unnecessary
and inefficient access to ensure that
things are beautiful it's so blind and
also so counterproductive economically
that it's a kind of miracle that people
could even can even think that yeah many
governments are more concerned with
which obviously important things to
create uh car plants or electric battery
plants or sort of Engineers you can do
that beautifully you know well I have a
friend penoir in in uh in New York who's
in kind of a classic architect and he's
built lots of beautiful buildings in
downtown New York and he's made a very
clear case economically that you can
build a beautiful classic building for
the same price per square foot as a
concrete housing project
so the idea that beauty is excessively
expensive that's also that's also it's
just exactly yeah and that's why that's
the area I love thinking about the
economics of it because great creativity
is economically very significant for for
individuals and for people and for for a
country for whole cultures well Europe's
a great example of that I mean the whole
tourist industry of Europe is a a
consequence of beauty exactly and it's
unbelievably valuable
we should stop we're out of time oh so
it's too bad uh because I'd like to
continue talking and but we'll we will
we'll continue talking because we just
got going on the artistic warming up I
would really like to you know delve at
some point we should do this into the
particulars of some of the Artistic
Endeavors that you've been yeah you
should do that so great so for everyone
watching and listening thank you very
much for your thank you so much sorry I
took a bit of time to warm up oh that's
all it was it was nothing and it's
always the case and so it's one just one
thing on the economic thing if we
include oh there's one thing I've been
using recently in the government
conversations I've had
um not with the government but talking
about governments which is somebody a
single parent mother scribbles out a
book in the cafe in Edinburgh and then
that book becomes Harry Potter what's
that worth economically exactly that's a
great example it's worth it's worth a
hundred billion dollars maybe it's a
book that's worth billions it's a film
that's worth billions it's merchandising
right it's great PR for the whole of the
UK it creates tourism it's a a theme
park it's um it's a theatrical
performance every night yeah and it's
not um you know but it's not and it's
not going to go away tomorrow no it's
like well
Shakespeare worth yeah right exactly
it's beyond money yeah yeah yeah well
the the fact that something is beautiful
so that's another way of thinking about
the fact that something is truly
beautiful is actually an index of its
value and a fair chunk of that value can
be economic because values
multi-dimensional and no the notion this
is a real problem with the conservative
mode of thinking is the notion that
beauty is some unnecessary appendage to
the you know necessary Bare Bones
concrete efficient reality that's so
blind
ugly is there's nothing more expensive
than stupidly ugly it demoralizes people
terribly so sorry thanks so much yeah
see you soon
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com